SSISM CTTM — Step-by-Step Guide for Civil Society
Goal: Teach teams how to use the SSISM tools to detect manipulation, protect communities, and build long-term civic resilience — ethically and legally.
 
Quick orientation (2 minutes)
•	What it is: SSISM CTTM = an open-source defensive AI model that computes a Digital Trust Score (Φ) for communications.
•	Purpose: Protect truth without hatred; detect deceit without anger; train awareness without ego.
•	Core rule: If Φ < 0.2 → MANDATORY LOCKOUT (24-hour freeze before action).
 
Phase 0 — Prepare (before you run anything)
1.	Assemble a small team (2–6 people): one trainer, one tech lead, 1–3 community liaisons.
2.	Secure your devices: 
o	Use updated OS and antivirus.
o	Use end-to-end encrypted messaging for internal communication (Signal).
o	Create a separate account / folder for SSISM work (so sensitive files are isolated).
3.	Backups & keys: store any sensitive keys/passwords in an encrypted vault (e.g., KeePassXC, not cloud unless encrypted).
 
Phase 1 — Get the repo (10–20 minutes)
1.	Clone the repo (if team member can run git):
git clone https://github.com/UIngarsoe/SSISM_CTTM_AI_for_Justice-.git
cd SSISM_CTTM_AI_for_Justice-
2.	If someone prefers manual download: use Download ZIP from GitHub, then unzip.
3.	Files to open first (non-code readers):
o	README.md
o	SSISM_CTTM_GUIDELINES.md
o	Understanding_Intelligent_Military_Organizations.md
 
Phase 2 — Run the demo locally (technical, 5–15 minutes)
(One tech person needed; uses Python 3)
1.	Ensure Python 3 installed. Create virtual environment (optional but recommended):
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate     # Linux/Mac
venv\Scripts\activate        # Windows
pip install --upgrade pip
2.	Run the demo script (example name: ssism_cttm_v2025_gn1.py or ssism_cttm.py):
python ssism_cttm_v2025_gn1.py
3.	Observe example outputs — they show Phi values and action messages (Lockout vs Proceed).
If you cannot run code, proceed with the non-technical workshop steps below (Phase 3). The repository still fully supports learning without execution.
 
Phase 3 — Community workshop: teach the idea (30–90 minutes)
Audience: activists, students, journalists, community leaders.
1.	Intro (10 min): Explain what social engineering is (authority + urgency tricks). Show one real example (non-sensitive) and how it manipulates behavior.
2.	Phi logic (15 min): Explain the five factors simply:
o	Authority (who claims power?)
o	Urgency (is it pushing immediate action?)
o	Linguistics (tone, threats, grammatical oddities)
o	Link/File risk (unknown links, attachments)
o	Time anomaly (odd hours, out-of-context messages)
3.	Interactive exercise (15–30 min):
o	Present 4 sample messages; ask groups to score A, U, L, R, dT (0–5 each).
o	Use the Python demo (tech lead) or a spreadsheet with the sigmoid mapping to compute Phi.
o	Discuss what the lockout decision means.
4.	Lockout rule practice (10–15 min):
o	If Phi < 0.2 → practice a 24-hour verification protocol: verify via independent channel, request official proof, ask others to confirm.
o	Make a checklist: who verifies, how to document verification, how to re-activate action.
 
Phase 4 — Operationalize for everyday safety (ongoing)
1.	Adopt the LOCKOUT policy across the organization:
o	Codify: “If SSISM returns LOCKOUT, no financial or operational action for 24 hours.”
o	Provide a verification escalation path (two trusted validators).
2.	Use tools for secure communication:
o	Messaging: Signal (E2EE), Session, or Wire
o	Email: ProtonMail or Tutanota for sensitive correspondence
o	Metadata protection: use Tor or trusted VPN when needed to browse/verify sources (avoid illegal activities)
3.	Minimize stored sensitive data: Only keep what you need. Encrypt stored files.
4.	Create a simple dashboard (optional): export Phi outputs to CSV and create a one-page status board for decision makers.
 
Phase 5 — Training & capacity building (3–12 months)
1.	Monthly training sessions using real scenarios (redacted).
2.	Train-the-trainer program: pick community trainers and certify them on the CTTM method.
3.	Simulations: role play phishing, authority scams, and communal verification exercises.
4.	Documentation: keep a secure log of decisions and outcomes (redact identities) to build local datasets.
 
Phase 6 — Community sharing & scaling (3–24 months)
1.	Publish sanitized case studies: show how Lockout saved funds or prevented harm. This builds trust.
2.	Translate docs: Burmese and other local languages; add to /docs/.
3.	Invite contributors using CONTRIBUTING.md — focus on translators, educators, and UX designers.
4.	Form an alliance: partner with local NGOs, Access Now, or regional human rights groups for training partnerships.
 
Ethical & safety rules (must follow)
•	Never use SSISM for targeting, hacking, or surveillance. This is defensive only.
•	Respect privacy: never collect or expose personal data without consent.
•	Do no harm: if a Lockout could endanger someone (e.g., immediate safety risk), follow humanitarian safety protocols first — the Lockout is for social engineering — not for emergency life-saving action.
•	Document decisions — transparency builds accountability.
 
Low-tech alternatives (if internet or devices limited)
•	Use printed scoring sheets with the five factors and a precomputed lookup table for Phi ranges (e.g., Z→Phi).
•	Conduct workshops and roleplay; track decisions on paper logs stored securely.
 
How to interpret Phi in practice (cheat sheet)
•	Φ ≥ 0.5 — Low risk: proceed with caution.
•	0.2 ≤ Φ < 0.5 — Medium risk: verify, cross-check.
•	Φ < 0.2 — High risk: MANDATORY LOCKOUT (24 hours). No action until verification.
(Thresholds are practical guidelines; groups can adapt to context but must document changes.)
 
Sample verification checklist (for Lockout)
1.	Has the sender used official, verifiable channels? (call to official number)
2.	Is there independent confirmation from at least two trusted sources?
3.	Is there a verifiable public record (press release, official site, government publication)?
4.	Is the request financial/operational? If yes, require notarized/official documentation.
5.	Document verification steps and outcomes.
 
Safety-first escalation pathway
•	If tool signals Lockout but a person is in immediate danger: prioritize human safety (call emergency services, trusted NGO, or local support). The Lockout is not for life-saving triage.
 
Building trust & community buy-in
•	Publicly publish your principles and how you use SSISM (without sensitive logs) — transparency reduces suspicion.
•	Run public workshops and invite local leaders.
•	Publish sanitized success stories to encourage adoption.
 
Maintaining & updating the system
•	Version control: tag releases (v1.0, v2025-GN1).
•	Keep a changelog (CHANGELOG.md).
•	Review and recalibrate weights quarterly or after major events. Use documented test-cases.
 
When to ask for help
•	If you suspect a sophisticated campaign or threats to staff safety: reach out to trusted digital security organizations (e.g., Digital Security Helpline groups, Citizen Lab, Access Now) — do not try to handle advanced attacks alone.
 
Quick resources (starter list)
•	Signal (messaging) — secure comms
•	ProtonMail (email) — secure email
•	Tor Browser — metadata protection (use responsibly)
•	KeePassXC — local password vault
•	GitHub — repository and collaboration
•	Citizen Lab / Access Now — digital rights & incident help
 
End of the guide. 

